README.md, before:

# Project_Driver_Drowsiness_and_fatigue_detection
Project_Driver_Drowsiness_and_fatigue_detection

# driver-fatigue-detection-system
drowsiness detection

# Intallation process

## step 1:
 Install all libraries
 - scipy  (pip install scipy)
     - We’ll need the SciPy package so we can compute the Euclidean distance between facial landmarks points in the eye aspect ratio calculation (not strictly a requirement, but you should have SciPy installed if you intend on doing any work in the computer vision, image processing, or machine learning space).

- OpenCv
  - openCv for computer vision

- numpy (pip install numpy)
  - numpy for basic processing and calcutions ...

- imutils (pip install imutils)
   - We’ll also need the imutils package, my series of computer vision and image processing functions to make working with OpenCV easier.

-  pyglet (pip install pyglet)
    - we'll also need pyglet  playing sound such as .mp3 , .wav ...  

-  dlib
   - To detect and localize facial landmarks we’ll need the dlib library


# installation of Dlib libary
These instructions assume you are on macOS, but basically the same on Linux.

Pre-reqs:
- Have Python 3 installed. On macOS, this could be installed from homebrew or even via standard
  Python 3.6 downloaded installer from https://www.python.org/download. On Linux, just use your
  package manager.
- On macOS:
  - Install XCode from the Mac App Store (or install the XCode command line utils).
  - Have [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) installed
  - Install boost with this command: `brew install boost-python --with-python3 --without-python`
- On Linux:
  - Install boost. On Ubuntu, that's `sudo apt-get install libboost-all-dev`
- This assumes you don't have an nVidia GPU and don't have Cuda and cuDNN installed and don't want
  GPU acceleration (since none of the current Mac models support this).
- On Windows:
  - Please follow this link to install dlib on Windows: https://www.learnopencv.com/install-dlib-on-windows/

Clone the code from github:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/davisking/dlib.git
```

Build the main dlib library:

```bash
cd dlib
mkdir build; cd build; cmake .. -DDLIB_USE_CUDA=0 -DUSE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS=1; cmake --build .
```

Build and install the Python extensions:

```bash
cd ..
python3 setup.py install --yes USE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS --no DLIB_USE_CUDA
```

At this point, you should be able to run `python3` and type `import dlib` successfully.

# if you have python 2.7.---
```bash
cd ..
python setup.py install --yes USE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS --no DLIB_USE_CUDA
```
# step 2
- Download the dlib’s pre-trained facial landmark detector. from hear "http://jmp.sh/4bIYiPU " place it place it same floder where alarm.wav contains

- Rename the downloaded file to "shape_predictor_68_face_landmarks.dat"

- Note: without dlib’s pre-trained facial landmark detector file you can't run the code

# step 3

Running with default parameters:
```bash
python drowsiness detection.py

```

Running with customized parameters
```bash
python drowsiness detection.py --webcam 1 --alarm "alarm.wav"

```
--webcam 1: mean using the camera on channel 1 to get images
--alarm "alarm.wav": mean using the audio file alarm.wav as alarm sound_alarm

## Results On my Computer with NO ALERT

<p align="center"> <img src="project_driver_drowsiness_detection1.png"/> </p>

## Results On my Computer with DROWSINESS ALERT

<p align="center"> <img src="project_driver_drowsiness_detection2.png"/> </p>

Copyright Romaric Tsopnang, All rights reserved.

Commit message:

Updating Readme.md to add the methodology used to detect drowsiness

README.md, after:

# Project_Driver_Drowsiness_and_fatigue_detection
Project_Driver_Drowsiness_and_fatigue_detection

## Methodology : How we detect DROWSINESS
The code detect faces and get facial landmarks coordinates especially the 12 points which define the two eyes left and right (Fig 1). After getting the 12 points of left and right eye, we compute Eye aspect ratio (Fig 2) to estimate the level of the eye opening. Open eyes have high values (>0.2) of EAR while the closed eye it is getting close to zero.

<p align="center"> <img src="facial-landmarks.jpg"/> </p>
Fig 1: 300-W facial landmarks annotations.

<p align="center"> <img src="eye-aspect-ratio.png"/> </p>
Fig 2: Eye aspect ratio formula.

# Intallation process

## step 1:
 Install all libraries
 - scipy  (pip install scipy)
     - We’ll need the SciPy package so we can compute the Euclidean distance between facial landmarks points in the eye aspect ratio calculation (not strictly a requirement, but you should have SciPy installed if you intend on doing any work in the computer vision, image processing, or machine learning space).

- OpenCv
  - openCv for computer vision

- numpy (pip install numpy)
  - numpy for basic processing and calcutions ...

- imutils (pip install imutils)
   - We’ll also need the imutils package, my series of computer vision and image processing functions to make working with OpenCV easier.

-  pyglet (pip install pyglet)
    - we'll also need pyglet  playing sound such as .mp3 , .wav ...  

-  dlib
   - To detect and localize facial landmarks we’ll need the dlib library


# installation of Dlib libary
These instructions assume you are on macOS, but basically the same on Linux.

Pre-reqs:
- Have Python 3 installed. On macOS, this could be installed from homebrew or even via standard
  Python 3.6 downloaded installer from https://www.python.org/download. On Linux, just use your
  package manager.
- On macOS:
  - Install XCode from the Mac App Store (or install the XCode command line utils).
  - Have [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) installed
  - Install boost with this command: `brew install boost-python --with-python3 --without-python`
- On Linux:
  - Install boost. On Ubuntu, that's `sudo apt-get install libboost-all-dev`
- This assumes you don't have an nVidia GPU and don't have Cuda and cuDNN installed and don't want
  GPU acceleration (since none of the current Mac models support this).
- On Windows:
  - Please follow this link to install dlib on Windows: https://www.learnopencv.com/install-dlib-on-windows/

Clone the code from github:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/davisking/dlib.git
```

Build the main dlib library:

```bash
cd dlib
mkdir build; cd build; cmake .. -DDLIB_USE_CUDA=0 -DUSE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS=1; cmake --build .
```

Build and install the Python extensions:

```bash
cd ..
python3 setup.py install --yes USE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS --no DLIB_USE_CUDA
```

At this point, you should be able to run `python3` and type `import dlib` successfully.

# if you have python 2.7.---
```bash
cd ..
python setup.py install --yes USE_AVX_INSTRUCTIONS --no DLIB_USE_CUDA
```
# step 2
- Download the dlib’s pre-trained facial landmark detector. from hear "http://jmp.sh/4bIYiPU " place it place it same floder where alarm.wav contains

- Rename the downloaded file to "shape_predictor_68_face_landmarks.dat"

- Note: without dlib’s pre-trained facial landmark detector file you can't run the code

# step 3

Running with default parameters:
```bash
python drowsiness detection.py

```

Running with customized parameters
```bash
python drowsiness detection.py --webcam 1 --alarm "alarm.wav"

```
--webcam 1: mean using the camera on channel 1 to get images
--alarm "alarm.wav": mean using the audio file alarm.wav as alarm sound_alarm

## Results On my Computer with NO ALERT

<p align="center"> <img src="project_driver_drowsiness_detection1.png"/> </p>

## Results On my Computer with DROWSINESS ALERT

<p align="center"> <img src="project_driver_drowsiness_detection2.png"/> </p>


Copyright Romaric Tsopnang, All rights reserved.
